.TH CTX 1 "June 2026" "ctx 1.0.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
ctx \- terminal context and vault variable manager
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B ctx
.I command
[\fIargs\fR...]
.PP
.B ctxctl
.I command
[\fIargs\fR...]
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBctx\fR is a lightweight CLI for managing named context vaults of shell
variables. It is designed for pentesting labs, HTB/PG machines, client
engagements, homelabs, cloud projects, and any workflow where you need quick
access to context-specific values such as IP addresses, domains, credentials,
tokens, hosts, and ports.
.PP
Vaults are stored as env-compatible files under
\fI\(ti/.config/ctx/vaults/\fR. The active vault is terminal-local via the
\fBCTX_ACTIVE_VAULT\fR environment variable, set by shell integration when
you run \fBctx load\fR.
.PP
Python cannot export variables into a parent shell. Therefore \fBctx\fR is a
shell function (installed from \fI\(ti/.local/share/ctx/shell/\fR) that wraps
the \fBctxctl\fR Python backend. Commands like \fBctx load\fR, \fBctx unload\fR,
and \fBctx set\fR require this shell integration. \fBctx set\fR automatically
reloads the active vault into the shell after each successful write.
.SH COMMANDS
.TP
.B ctx create \fIvault\fR
Create a new empty vault file. Does not load the vault.
.TP
.B ctx load [\fIvault\fR]
Load a vault into the current shell. With a vault name, selects that vault,
unloads variables from any previously loaded vault, then sources variables.
Fails if the named vault does not exist; use \fBctx create\fR first.
Without a vault name, re-sources the active vault from disk. Handled by shell
integration.
.TP
.B ctx unload
Unload the currently loaded vault from this shell session. Removes all
variables that were sourced from the vault. Does not delete the vault file.
Handled by shell integration.
.TP
.B ctx current
Show the active vault for this terminal. Returns non-zero if none is set.
.TP
.B ctx list
List all vault names.
.TP
.B ctx set \fIkey\fR \fIvalue\fR
Set a variable in the active vault. Values with spaces should be quoted.
Validation warnings may be printed to stderr but do not block the operation.
The shell function automatically reloads the vault after each successful
\fBctx set\fR so shell variables (e.g. \fB$ip\fR) are updated immediately.
Handled by shell integration.
.TP
.B ctx get \fIkey\fR
Print a variable value from the active vault.
.TP
.B ctx unset \fIkey\fR
Remove a variable from the active vault.
.TP
.B ctx show
Display the active vault name and all stored variables.
.TP
.B ctx clear [\fB--force\fR]
Remove all variables from the active vault. Prompts for confirmation unless
\fB--force\fR is given.
.TP
.B ctx edit
Open the active vault file in \fB$EDITOR\fR (fallback: nano, then vi).
File permissions are restored to 600 after editing.
.TP
.B ctx path
Print the filesystem path of the active vault file.
.TP
.B ctx delete \fIvault\fR [\fB--force\fR]
Delete a named vault. Prompts for confirmation unless \fB--force\fR is given.
If deleting the active vault, shell integration unloads its variables and
clears \fBCTX_ACTIVE_VAULT\fR and \fBCTX_LOADED_VAULT\fR.
.TP
.B ctx rename \fIold\fR \fInew\fR
Rename a vault. If the current terminal uses the old name, updates
\fBCTX_ACTIVE_VAULT\fR.
.TP
.B ctx duplicate \fIold\fR \fInew\fR
Copy one vault to a new name.
.TP
.B ctx help
Show usage help (same as \fBctx --help\fR).
.SH FILES
.TP
.I \(ti/.config/ctx/
Configuration directory (mode 700).
.TP
.I \(ti/.config/ctx/vaults/
Vault storage directory (mode 700).
.TP
.I \(ti/.config/ctx/vaults/\fIname\fR.env
Vault file containing export lines (mode 600).
.TP
.I \(ti/.local/share/ctx/shell/ctx.sh
Bash shell integration.
.TP
.I \(ti/.local/share/ctx/shell/ctx.zsh
Zsh shell integration.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B CTX_ACTIVE_VAULT
Terminal-local active vault name, set by \fBctx load\fR.
.TP
.B CTX_LOADED_VAULT
Name of the vault currently loaded in this shell session.
.TP
.B EDITOR
Editor used by \fBctx edit\fR.
.SH EXAMPLES
HTB machine context:
.PP
.EX
ctx create forest
ctx load forest
ctx set ip 10.10.10.161
ctx set domain forest.htb
ctx set user svc-alfresco
ctx set pass "Password123!"
nmap -sC -sV $ip
evil-winrm -i $ip -u $user -p $pass
ctx unload
.EE
.PP
Switching vaults (previous variables are cleared):
.PP
.EX
ctx load sauna
echo $ip
.EE
.PP
Homelab context:
.PP
.EX
ctx create proxmox
ctx load proxmox
ctx set host pve.local
ctx set user root
ctx set pass "secret"
ssh $user@$host
.EE
.PP
Cloud/dev context:
.PP
.EX
ctx create aws-staging
ctx load aws-staging
ctx set url https://api.staging.example.com
ctx set token "eyJhbGciOi..."
curl -H "Authorization: Bearer $token" $url/health
.EE
.SH SECURITY
Vault files are stored in plaintext on disk with mode 600. Directories use
mode 700. There is no encryption in v1. Secrets are not masked in output.
Users are expected to protect their home directory and vault files accordingly.
Do not commit vault files to version control.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR ctxctl (1)

\fBctx\fR is installed via \fBinstall.sh\fR. See the project README for
full installation and troubleshooting instructions.
